AI Engineering and Knowledge Assistant Notes

Introduction

AI engineering combines software engineering, machine learning, data processing, and large language model technologies. An AI engineer often needs to build systems that can ingest information, transform it into useful representations, retrieve relevant information, and provide answers generated by an artificial intelligence model.

A practical knowledge assistant usually has several stages. Documents are first loaded from files or other sources. The content is then divided into smaller chunks. Each chunk can be transformed into a numerical representation called an embedding. The embeddings can be stored in a vector store. When a user asks a question, the question is also converted into an embedding. The system searches for chunks whose embeddings are semantically similar to the question. The retrieved information can then be provided to a language model to generate a final answer.

Python for AI Engineering

Python is one of the most commonly used programming languages for artificial intelligence and machine learning. Its simple syntax makes it suitable for experimentation as well as production systems.

Python provides built-in data structures such as lists, tuples, dictionaries, and sets. Lists are ordered collections and can contain duplicate values. Dictionaries store information using key-value pairs. Sets contain unique values and are useful when membership checks or removing duplicates are important.

Functions are fundamental building blocks in Python applications. A function can accept parameters and return a result. Functions help separate responsibilities and make code easier to test and maintain.

Python also supports object-oriented programming. Classes allow developers to combine data and behavior into reusable objects. An object can contain attributes representing state and methods representing behavior.

Object-Oriented Programming

Encapsulation means keeping an object's internal state controlled through its public interface. Python uses naming conventions such as a leading underscore and name mangling for attributes that should not normally be accessed directly.

Inheritance allows one class to reuse or extend the behavior of another class. A child class can inherit methods and attributes from a parent class.

Method overriding occurs when a child class provides its own implementation of a method defined by its parent class. This is commonly used when different objects need to respond differently to the same operation.

Python does not provide traditional method overloading in the same way as languages such as Java or C++. Instead, Python developers commonly use default parameters, variable-length arguments, or conditional logic to support different calling patterns.

Polymorphism allows different objects to expose compatible behavior through a common interface. This is especially useful in software systems where components may have different implementations but need to be used in the same way.

Abstract classes can define common behavior and interfaces for subclasses. Python provides the abc module for creating abstract base classes. An abstract method defines an expected operation that subclasses should implement.

Modules and Packages

A Python module is generally a Python file containing code such as classes, functions, and variables. A package is a directory containing related modules.

Packages help organize larger applications. A project can separate models, services, utilities, APIs, and infrastructure into different packages.

For example, an AI application may have a models package containing document models, an embeddings package containing embedding-related implementations, and a retrieval package containing search functionality.

Using packages with clear responsibilities helps prevent a large application from becoming difficult to maintain.

APIs

An API provides a defined way for different software components to communicate. A web API commonly exposes endpoints that clients can call using HTTP.

A REST API may use methods such as GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, and DELETE. GET is generally used for retrieving resources. POST is commonly used to create or submit data. PUT and PATCH can update resources, while DELETE removes resources.

A knowledge assistant might expose an endpoint that accepts a user question. The backend can convert that question into an embedding, retrieve relevant documents, send the retrieved context to an LLM, and return the generated response.

Authentication and authorization are important considerations for production APIs. Authentication verifies who the user is, while authorization determines what the user is allowed to access.

Document Ingestion

Document ingestion is the process of bringing external information into an AI system.

A document may come from a text file, PDF, Word document, web page, database, or another source. A loader is responsible for reading the source and converting it into a form that the rest of the pipeline can process.

After loading, the document often needs to be cleaned or normalized. Depending on the source, this may involve removing unnecessary whitespace, handling encoding issues, extracting text, or removing repeated headers and footers.

A useful document object can contain both the document content and metadata. Metadata might include the original filename, document identifier, author, creation date, department, or access permissions.

Keeping metadata is important because retrieved information may eventually need to be presented with a source citation.

Text Chunking

Large documents are usually divided into smaller pieces before generating embeddings.

A chunk should contain enough information to represent a meaningful piece of context. If chunks are too small, important information may be separated across many chunks. If chunks are too large, retrieval can become less precise and the amount of context sent to an LLM can increase.

Chunk overlap is sometimes used to preserve context between neighboring chunks. For example, if one chunk ends in the middle of an explanation, the beginning of the next chunk can repeat some text from the previous chunk.

A chunking strategy should consider the structure of the source document. Simple character-based chunking is easy to implement, while more advanced strategies may split using paragraphs, sentences, headings, or semantic boundaries.

The correct chunk size depends on the application. There is no universally optimal chunk size for every document collection.

Embeddings

An embedding is a numerical representation of data such as text. An embedding model transforms text into a vector containing many numerical values.

Texts with related meanings tend to produce vectors that are closer together in embedding space than unrelated texts.

For example, the following questions may have semantically related embeddings:

"What is Python used for?"

"Why is Python popular in artificial intelligence?"

"Which programming language is commonly used for machine learning?"

They use different words, but they discuss a similar concept.

An embedding should not normally be interpreted by looking at individual dimensions. A dimension does not necessarily correspond to a human-readable feature such as "Python" or "AI." The useful information is represented by the overall position and direction of the vector.

The dimensionality of an embedding depends on the model. One embedding model may produce 384 dimensions while another may produce 768, 1024, or more.

Embedding Models

An embedding model is responsible for converting text into vectors.

A local embedding model runs on the developer's machine or infrastructure. This can reduce dependency on an external API and may provide better control over privacy and operating costs.

An API-based embedding model runs on a remote service. It may provide highly capable models without requiring the application to manage the model itself.

The embedding model used during indexing should generally be compatible with the embedding model used during querying. If documents are embedded with one model and queries are embedded with an incompatible model, similarity calculations may not be meaningful.

Cosine Similarity

Cosine similarity is one common method for comparing vectors.

It measures the similarity between two vectors based on the angle between them rather than simply comparing their raw magnitudes.

A cosine similarity close to 1 indicates that two vectors point in similar directions. A value near 0 indicates little directional similarity, while a negative value indicates opposing directions.

The mathematical formula is:

cosine_similarity(A, B) = dot(A, B) / (norm(A) * norm(B))

The dot product measures how strongly two vectors align. The vector norm represents the magnitude of a vector.

For normalized embeddings, similarity calculations can sometimes be simplified because the vector magnitudes are already normalized.

Vector Stores

A vector store is responsible for storing embeddings and supporting similarity search.

A basic vector store can maintain records containing the original chunk, its embedding vector, and associated metadata.

For example, a stored record might conceptually contain:

chunk:
Python is widely used in artificial intelligence.

vector:
[0.12, -0.03, 0.08, ...]

metadata:
filename = python_intro.txt
chunk_index = 4

When a user submits a query, the query is converted into an embedding. The vector store compares the query vector with stored vectors and returns the most similar records.

The number of results returned is often controlled using a parameter called top_k. If top_k is 5, the system returns the five highest-scoring results.

A simple vector store can calculate similarity against every stored vector. This is called a brute-force or linear search approach. It is easy to understand and works well for small collections.

For very large collections, specialized vector indexes can make nearest-neighbor search significantly faster.

Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

When a vector database contains millions of vectors, comparing a query against every vector can become expensive.

Approximate nearest neighbor algorithms attempt to find highly similar vectors without calculating an exact comparison against every stored vector.

Different indexing techniques make different trade-offs between search speed, memory usage, construction time, and recall.

Systems such as FAISS and various vector databases provide optimized implementations for large-scale vector retrieval.

RAG

Retrieval-Augmented Generation, commonly called RAG, combines information retrieval with language generation.

A basic RAG pipeline contains two major phases.

The first phase is indexing. Documents are loaded, split into chunks, converted into embeddings, and stored.

The second phase is querying. A user question is converted into an embedding, relevant chunks are retrieved, and those chunks are supplied to a language model as context.

The language model then generates an answer based on the retrieved information.

RAG is useful when the required information is not contained in the model's original training data or when an application needs answers grounded in a private knowledge base.

RAG also makes it possible to update a knowledge base without retraining the language model every time a document changes.

Basic RAG Pipeline

A simplified RAG system can be represented as:

User Question
    ↓
Query Embedding
    ↓
Vector Search
    ↓
Top-K Relevant Chunks
    ↓
Context Construction
    ↓
Language Model
    ↓
Final Answer

The quality of every stage affects the final response.

If document loading fails, the system cannot retrieve useful information. If chunking is poor, important context may be lost. If embeddings are unsuitable, retrieval quality may be poor. If retrieval returns irrelevant chunks, the language model may produce an incorrect or unsupported answer.

Retrieval Quality

Retrieval quality is one of the most important parts of a RAG system.

A system may use top_k retrieval to obtain several candidate chunks. Returning only one chunk may miss useful information, while returning too many chunks may introduce irrelevant information.

The best value for top_k depends on the application and the quality of the retrieval system.

Similarity scores can be used to rank results, but a high similarity score does not guarantee that a chunk contains the exact answer.

For example, a question about database indexing may retrieve documents discussing databases generally. Those documents may be semantically related but may not contain the specific information required.

This is why production retrieval systems often include additional techniques such as metadata filtering, reranking, hybrid search, or query expansion.

Metadata Filtering

Metadata can improve retrieval by limiting the search space.

For example, suppose a knowledge base contains documents belonging to engineering, finance, and human resources.

A user asking about engineering deployment procedures should not necessarily retrieve documents from the finance department.

Metadata filters can restrict retrieval based on fields such as department, document type, project, user permissions, or date.

This becomes particularly important when a knowledge assistant contains confidential information.

Hybrid Search

Vector search is based primarily on semantic similarity. Traditional keyword search looks for exact or closely related terms.

Hybrid search combines both approaches.

For example, a user might search for a specific error code such as "E1046". Exact keyword matching can be extremely useful for such identifiers, while vector search may be better for natural-language questions.

A hybrid retrieval system can combine lexical and semantic signals to improve search quality.

Reranking

Initial vector retrieval may return several candidate documents. A reranker can then examine the query and candidate passages more carefully and reorder them.

The first retrieval stage is usually optimized for speed and recall. The reranking stage can spend more computation determining which candidates are most relevant.

A common architecture is:

Query
    ↓
Vector Search
    ↓
Top 20 Candidates
    ↓
Reranker
    ↓
Top 5 Results
    ↓
LLM

Reranking can improve precision when the initial vector search produces several broadly relevant results.

Large Language Models

A large language model generates text based on patterns learned during training.

LLMs can summarize documents, answer questions, extract structured information, generate code, classify text, and perform many other language-related tasks.

An LLM does not automatically have access to a private company's internal documents. A RAG system can provide relevant internal information as context.

When using an LLM in a RAG system, the application should clearly distinguish between retrieved context and the user's original question.

Prompt Engineering

A prompt is the input provided to a language model.

A RAG prompt commonly contains instructions, retrieved context, and the user's question.

For example:

You are a knowledge assistant.
Answer the user's question using the provided context.
If the context does not contain enough information, say that you do not have enough information.

Context:
[retrieved documents]

Question:
[user question]

Good prompts can reduce hallucinations by explicitly instructing the model to rely on retrieved evidence.

However, prompt engineering alone cannot fix poor retrieval. If the correct information is never retrieved, the model cannot reliably use it.

Hallucination

A hallucination occurs when a language model generates information that is unsupported, incorrect, or invented.

RAG can reduce hallucinations by grounding answers in retrieved information, but it does not guarantee that hallucinations will disappear.

The system should be designed so that the model knows when the retrieved context does not contain an answer.

Source citations can also improve transparency. A response might identify which document and chunk supported a particular statement.

RAG Evaluation

A RAG system should be evaluated systematically rather than relying only on a few manual tests.

Retrieval evaluation asks whether the correct documents or chunks were retrieved.

Generation evaluation asks whether the final answer is correct, relevant, grounded, and useful.

Example retrieval metrics include recall and precision.

Recall measures how much of the relevant information was successfully retrieved.

Precision measures how much of the retrieved information was actually relevant.

A system can have high recall but poor precision if it retrieves many irrelevant documents.

Evaluation Dataset

A useful evaluation dataset contains questions and expected supporting documents or answers.

For example:

Question:
What programming language is widely used in artificial intelligence?

Expected source:
Python section

Question:
What is the purpose of chunk overlap?

Expected source:
Text Chunking section

Question:
Why is metadata useful in a knowledge assistant?

Expected source:
Document Ingestion and Metadata Filtering sections

Running these questions repeatedly allows developers to compare retrieval strategies and model changes.

Caching

Caching can improve performance by avoiding repeated expensive operations.

Embedding generation can be cached when the same document or query is processed repeatedly.

LLM responses may also be cached for identical requests when appropriate.

However, caching must account for changes to the underlying documents. If a document changes but the old embedding remains in the cache, the system can return stale information.

Production Architecture

A production knowledge assistant may contain several services.

A document ingestion service processes uploaded documents.

An embedding service generates vectors.

A vector database stores and retrieves embeddings.

An API service receives user questions.

An LLM service generates answers.

An authentication service controls user access.

An observability system collects logs, metrics, and traces.

A simplified architecture is:

Client
    ↓
API Gateway
    ↓
Knowledge Assistant API
    ├── Query Embedding Service
    ├── Vector Database
    ├── Reranker
    └── LLM Service

Document uploads can follow a separate path:

Client
    ↓
Document Upload API
    ↓
Object Storage
    ↓
Ingestion Worker
    ↓
Text Extraction
    ↓
Chunking
    ↓
Embedding
    ↓
Vector Database

Asynchronous Processing

Large documents can take significant time to process.

Instead of making a user wait for the entire ingestion operation, a production system can place an ingestion job onto a queue.

A background worker consumes the job and processes the document asynchronously.

The system can then expose a status such as:

uploaded
processing
chunking
embedding
completed
failed

This architecture improves user experience and allows document processing to scale independently.

Observability

AI systems need observability just like traditional software systems.

Useful information includes request latency, embedding generation time, vector search latency, number of retrieved chunks, similarity scores, LLM latency, token usage, and errors.

For RAG systems, logging only the final answer is often insufficient.

Developers may need to inspect which chunks were retrieved and why a particular answer was generated.

Security

Security is especially important for enterprise knowledge assistants.

Documents may contain confidential information, personal information, financial information, source code, or internal company policies.

Access control should be applied before returning documents to a user.

A system should not retrieve a document merely because its embedding is highly similar if the requesting user is not authorized to access it.

Metadata can contain access-control information that is used as a filter during retrieval.

Deployment

A small AI application can run on a single machine.

A larger system may use containers and orchestration platforms.

Docker can package an application and its dependencies into a reproducible environment.

Kubernetes can manage containers across multiple machines and provide features such as scaling, service discovery, rolling deployments, and health checks.

Cloud object storage can be used for original documents, while a database or vector database can store metadata and embeddings.

Conclusion

A practical AI knowledge assistant is not simply an LLM connected to a prompt.

It is a complete software system involving document ingestion, data transformation, chunking, embeddings, vector storage, retrieval, prompt construction, language generation, evaluation, security, and deployment.

The quality of the final answer depends heavily on the quality of the information retrieved before the language model is called.

For this reason, building a RAG system is an excellent practical exercise for learning AI engineering. It combines traditional software engineering skills with machine learning concepts and modern language-model technologies.